Gradient Descent is an iterative algorithm used to _minimize an objective function_, commonly a cost function ([[05. Cost Function]]), by _updating the model parameters in the direction of the negative gradient of that function_.

---
## Gradient

The gradient is is the derivative of a multi-variable function, representing a vector that:

- Points in the direction of greatest increase of a function.
- Is zero at a local maximum or local minimum (_because there is no single direction of increase or decrease_).

$$
\nabla f(\mathbf{x}) =  
\left[  
\frac{\partial f}{\partial x_1},  
\frac{\partial f}{\partial x_2},  
\ldots,  
\frac{\partial f}{\partial x_n}  
\right]
$$

A derivate represents the _rate of change_ of a function _changing a the value of a variable_. In multi-variable functions, each partial derivate represents the rate of change of the function for a specific variable, fixing the others. -> Grouping all partial derivates gives us the direction of bigger increase.

---
## Gradient in Gradient Descent 

In the case of gradient descent, if we are evaluating the cost function, the gradient itself aims to increase our error. Instead if we move in the opposite direction, we aim to minimize the error.

In order to find the point where the cost is minimum, we should make _baby steps_ in the opposite direction of the gradient evaluated using the current values of parameters (weights and intercept).

Gradient calculation formula:

$$\theta = \theta - \alpha \nabla J(\theta)$$

Where:

- $\theta$: The function parameters.
- $\alpha$: The _learning rate_ of the gradient descent algorithm.
- $\nabla J(\theta)$: The gradient of the cost function evaluated in the parameters current values.

This is also known as _Vanilla Gradient Descent_.

---
## Variations of Gradient Descent

### Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD)

Instead of taking the sum over all training samples, when taking the gradient of the cost function, which can be expensive when the number of examples is big. _A small random subset of weights at each iteration_.

> Useful adaptation for very large datasets.

$$ \theta := \theta - \alpha \nabla_\theta J(\theta; x^{(i)}, y^{(i)}) $$

Where:

- $\theta$: The function parameters.
- $\alpha$: The _learning rate_.
- $\nabla J(\theta)$: The gradient of the cost function evaluated in the parameters current values.
### Adaptive Gradient Descent

Picks a different _learning rate_ for each parameter based on how much that parameter has been updated in the past.

Parameters that have been updated a lot will have their learning rate reduced, while parameters that haven’t changed much will have a higher learning rate. This makes AdaGrad particularly useful when dealing with sparse data, where some features are much less common than others.

$$ w_j = w_j - \frac{\alpha}{\sqrt{G_j + \epsilon}} \cdot \frac{\partial \text{Loss}}{\partial w_j} $$

### Momentum Gradient Descent


