In order to optimize server resource usage, multiple apps could be run on the same physical server.

**The problem** -> Each app may require its own runtime, version, dependencies, database, etc.

_Drawbacks_:
- Dependency conflicts.
- Lack of strong isolation.
- Painful scaling.
- Deployment and maintenance hell.

---
## Virtualization

Virtualization allow a computer to create multiple instances of operative systems (_Virtual Machines - VMs_) in the same physical server, allowing:

1. **Isolation**: Each app run in a different instance - isolating applications.
2. **Flexibility**: The developers decide how to divide resources.
3. **Portability**: We can create _snapshots_ of a VM. (backups).

### VM Resources

A virtual machine receives allocated computational resources shared by the **Hypervisor**.

1. Virtual Network Interface Card (vNIC)
2. Virtual Disk (vDisk)
3. Virtual RAM (vRAM)
4. Virtual CPU (vCPU)

---
### VMs Issues

1. _They are slow and heavy_: each VM has a complete OS, which introduce the whole dependencies and apps the OS has by default.
	1. This also leads to limited scalability -> As much resources a VM needs, a smaller set of VMs we will be able to produce.
2. _Poor environment parity_: Its hard to pair/sync the different environments of SDLC. -> Missing or version dependency issues is the most common case.
3. _Redundant OS Overhead_ -> Have multiple VMs with same OS, means allocating resources for duplicated software -> **Inefficient Image Management**.

