As shown in the [[01. Retrieval Augmented Generation#RAG Components|RAG Architecture Componentes]], RAG is composed of two main componentes:

1. _Retriever_: Which founds relevant information **related to a prompt**,
2. _LLM_: Which constructs a factual accurate response according to that prompt and the retrieved information.

Assuming the _retriever_ is working well, how do we measure the LLM to know if we should [[13. Adjusting LLM for RAG|adjust the LMM customizable components]] or simple change the underlying model?

---
## LLM Responsibilities in a RAG Pipeline

**The LLM assume** finds relevant information, possibly with a few irrelevant documents.

So, the LLM should:

- Respond clearly
- Incorporate relevant information
- Avoid irrelevant information
- Cite sources

These responsibilities are somewhat **subjective** -> Using other LLMs to evaluate our model performance result in a better handling of subjectivity as the evaluator model act as a judge of the response in different flanks.

> [RAGAS](https://docs.ragas.io/en/stable/) Open source library is a great LLM evaluation option.

---
## LLM Judge Evaluation Metrics (RAGAS)

### 1. Response Relevancy
Measures where response is relevant to the user prompt, **regardless of accuracy**.

1. The judge LLM generate possible prompts that could have lead to that answer.
2. Embed the original prompt an the generated samples.
3. Calculate cosine average cosine similarity between original prompt and sample prompts.

**This metric captures response relevancy, but not factual accuracy.**

### 2. Faithfulness
Measures whether the response is consistent with the retrieved information.

1. LLM identifies all factual claims in the response.
2. More LLM calls are made in order to validate if the claims of the response are supported by pieces of info in the kb.
3. _Faithfulness_ is the percentage of supported claims.

---
## External Metrics

Other metrics as surveys made to final users of the relevance of the response could help the developers to have a notion of which aspects of the LLM role are going wrong.

